.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.TH UNIVENTION-VIRTUAL-MACHINE-MANAGER 8 2011-11-23 UCS

.SH NAME
\fBunivention\-virtual\-machine\-manager\-daemon\fP \- virtual machine management

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B univention\-virtual\-machine\-manager\-daemon
.RI [ options ]
.IR uri ...

.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page documents briefly the
.B univention\-virtual\-machine\-manager\-daemon
command, a daemon to manage and monitor virtual machines in an UCS environment.
The UMC-UVMM-module or
.BR univention\-virtual\-machine\-manager (8)
can be used to interact with the daemon.

.SH OPTIONS
A summary of options is included below.
.TP
\fB\-h\fP, \fB\-\-help\fP\fP
Show this help message and exit.
.TP
\fIuri\fP...
Add the virtualization server specified by \fIuri\fP to the UVMM.
.SS Connection options
.TP
\fB\-u\fP \fISOCKET\fP, \fB\-\-unix=\fP\fISOCKET\fP
Path to the UNIX socket.
.SS LDAP options
.TP
\fB\-c\fP \fICACHE\fP, \fB\-\-cache=\fP\fICACHE\fP
Cache LDAP data and Virtual machine information in the given directory.
Used when the LDAP-server or virtualization host is unavailable during runtime.
.TP
\fB\-C\fP, \fB\-\-clean\fP
Do not load cached state on startup.
.SS Daemon options
.TP
\fB\-p\fP \fIPIDFILE\fP, \fB\-\-pidfile=\fP\fIPIDFILE\fP
Path to the PID-file.
.TP
\fB\-d\fP, \fB\-\-daemon\fP
Fork daemon into background.
.TP
\fB\-v\fP, \fB\-\-verbose\fP
Print additional information during runtime.
.TP
\fB\-l\fP \fILOGFILE\fP, \fB\-\-log=\fP\fILOGFILE\fP
Path to the log-file.
.TP
\fB\-i\fP \fICONFFILE\fP, \fB\-\-config=\fP\fICONFFILE\fP
Path to the ini-file.
.TP
\fB\-I\fP, \fB\-\-no\-ini\fP.
Skip reading ini-file.

.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/univention/uvmmd.ini
.TP
.I /var/cache/univention-virtual-machine-manager-daemon
.TP
.I /var/log/univention/virtual-machine-manager-daemon.log
.TP
.I /var/run/uvmm.socket
.TP
.I /var/run/uvmmd.pid

.SH SIGNALS
.TP
.B SIGHUP
Close and reopen all logfiles.
.TP
.B SIGUSR1
Re-execute the daemon process.
.TP
.B SIGUSR2
Create memory usage dump in \fI/var/tmp/uvmm-mm_*.json\fP.

.SH BUGS
Bugs can be reported using the Univention Bugzilla bug-tracker at
.BR https://forge.univention.org/bugzilla/enter_bug.cgi?product=UCS&component=Virtual+Machine+Manager+(UVMM) .

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR univention\-virtual\-machine\-manager (8),
.BR https://wiki.univention.de/index.php?title=UVMM ,
.BR virsh (1).

.SH AUTHOR
Copyright (c) 2009-2019 Univention GmbH, Germany
