.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.TH UNIVENTION-VIRTUAL-MACHINE-MANAGER 8 2011-11-23 UCS

.SH NAME
\fBunivention\-virtual\-machine\-manager\fP \- management user interface

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B univention\-virtual\-machine\-manager
.RI [ options ]
.I mode
.IR arguments...
.br
.B uvmm
.RI [ options ]
.I mode
.IR arguments...

.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page documents briefly the
.B univention\-virtual\-machine\-manager
command, a tool to manage virtual machines in an UCS environment.
It is a command-line tool to communicates directly with the
.BR univention\-virtual\-machine\-manager\-daemon (8)
and can be used instead of the UMC-Web-module to script repeating tasks or to
debug problems.
.br
Normally it communicates directly with the local
.BR univention\-virtual\-machine\-manager\-daemon (8)
using a UNIX-domain socket.
.br
The first argument
.I mode
selects the command, while all following arguments are command specific.

.SH OPTIONS
A summary of options is included below.
.TP
\fB\-h\fP, \fB\-\-help\fP\fP
Show this help message and exit.
.TP
\fB\-u\fP \fISOCKET\fP, \fB\-\-unix=\fP\fISOCKET\fP
Path to the UNIX socket.
.TP
\fB\-v\fP, \fB\-\-verbose\fP
Print additional information during command execution.
.TP
\fB\-b \fBldap://\fP\fIHOST\fP\fB:\fP\fIPORT\fP\fB/\fP\fIBASE\fP|\fB''\fP, \fB\-\-ldap\-base \fBldap://\fP\fIHOST\fP\fB:\fP\fIPORT\fP\fB/\fP\fIBASE\fP|\fB''\fP
Base-LDAP-uri for searching the hosts to manage.
All nodes matching \fB(univentionService=* Host)\fP will be added as managed nodes.
To disable this feature pass an empty argument, e.g. \fB''\fP.

.SH COMMANDS
.SS Daemon management
.TP
\fBunivention\-virtual\-machine\-manager groups\fP
Return the names of groups of virtualization server.
.TP
\fBunivention\-virtual\-machine\-manager nodes\fP \fIgroup\fP [\fIuri-pattern\fP]
Return the list of uris used to specify the virtualization server,
which belong to the given \fIgroup\fP.
The optional \fIuri-pattern\fP is a
.BR glob (7)
pattern, which can be used to filter the servers based on their uri.
.TP
\fBunivention\-virtual\-machine\-manager add\fP \fIuri\fP
Add the virtualization server specified by \fIuri\fP to the UVMM.
.TP
\fBunivention\-virtual\-machine\-manager remove\fP \fIuri\fP
Remove the virtualization server specified by \fIuri\fP from the UVMM.
.TP
 \fBunivention\-virtual\-machine\-manager ldap\fP
Query LDAP for all virtualization servers and add them to the UVMM.
Use option \fB\-b\fP to explicitly specify a LDAP server and LDAP base.
.TP
\fBunivention\-virtual\-machine\-manager frequency\fP \fIfrequency\fP [\fIuri\fP]
Set the interval how often UVMM queries all registers or the specific
virtualization server corresponding to \fIuri\fP. The frequency is given in
[ms].
.TP
\fBunivention\-virtual\-machine\-manager bye\fP
End the connection. Only useful for debugging.
.TP
\fBunivention\-virtual\-machine\-manager domains\fP \fIuri\fP [\fIname-pattern\fP]
Query virtualization server specifies by \fIuri\fP for all domains.
The optional \fIname-pattern\fP is a
.BR gob (7)
patterm, which can be used to filter the domains based on their name.

.SS Domain management
.TP
\fBunivention\-virtual\-machine\-manager define\fP \fIuri file_or_xml\fP
Define a new domain on the virtualization server specifies by \fIuri\fP.
\fIfile_or_xml\fP can either be a file name or an inline XML string
according to the format used by libvirt.
.TP
\fBunivention\-virtual\-machine\-manager undefine\fP \fIuri\fP \fIdomain\fP
Undefine the domain \fIdomain\fP on the virtualization server specifies by
\fIuri\fP.
.TP
\fBunivention\-virtual\-machine\-manager query\fP \fIuri\fP
Query virtualization server specifies by \fIuri\fP for all its domains.
.TP
\fBunivention\-virtual\-machine\-manager domain_info\fP \fIuri\fP \fIdomain\fP
Query virtualization server specifies by \fIuri\fP for just the domains \fIdomain\fP.
.TP
\fBunivention\-virtual\-machine\-manager state\fP  \fIuri\fP \fIdomain\fP \fIstate\fP
Change the state of domain \fIdomain\fP on the virtualization server specifies by
\fIuri\fP to the given state \fIstate\fP, which can be one of
\fBRUN\fP, \fBPAUSE\fP, \fBSUSPEND\fP, \fBRESTART\fP, \fBSHUTDOWN\fP, \fBSHUTOFF\fP.
.TP
\fBunivention\-virtual\-machine\-manager migrate\fP \fIuri statefile target_uri\fP
Migrate the domain \fIdomain\fP from the virtualization server specifies by
\fIuri\fP to the virtualization server specifies by \fItarget_uri\fP.
.TP
\fBunivention\-virtual\-machine\-manager save\fP \fIuri\fP \fIdomain\fP \fIstatefile\fP
On the virtualization server specified by \fIuri\fP save the domain
specified by its UUID \fIdomain\fP locally to the file \fIstatefile\fP.
The domain will be turned off.
.TP
\fBunivention\-virtual\-machine\-manager restore\fP \fIuri\fP \fIstatefile\fP
On the virtualization server specified by \fIuri\fP restore a domain locally
from the file \fIstatefile\fP.
.TP
\fBunivention\-virtual\-machine\-manager domain_update\fP \fIdomain\fP
Trigger an update of the domain specified by its UUID \fIdomain\fP.
.TP
\fBunivention\-virtual\-machine\-manager domain_clone\fP \fIuri\fP \fIdomain\fP \fIname\fP \fIsubst\fP
On the virtualization server specified by \fIuri\fP create a clone named \fIname\fP of the domain specified by its UUID \fIdomain\fP.
\fIsubst\fP can be used to pass in additional parameters:
.RS 7
.TP
\fBmac#\fP\fIold-mac\fP\fB=\fP[\fInew-mac\fP]
Replace the MAC address of the old interface given by \fIold-mac\fP with the explicitly given \fInew-mac\fP address or generate a new random address, if \fInew-mac\fP is not given.
The default is to keep the MAC address unmodified.
.TP
\fBcopy#\fP\fIdev\fP\fB=\fP\fImethod\fP
Specify \fImethod\fP to handle hard-disk specified by \fIdev\fP (e.g. \fBhda\fP, \fBvdb\fP, \fBxvdc\fP).
\fImethod\fP can be one of \fBcopy\fP, \fBcow\fP (copy-on-write using qcow2) or \fBshare\fP.
The default is disk device dependent.
.TP
\fBname#\fP\fIdev\fP\fB=\fP\fIname\fP
Specify an explicit \fIname\fP for hard-disk copying or cloning.
The default is to replace the name of the old virtual machine with the name of the new virtual machine or use a random name based on the name of the new virtual machine.
.RE
.TP
\fBunivention\-virtual\-machine\-manager snap_create\fP \fIuri\fP \fIdomain\fP \fIsnapshot\fP
On the virtualization server specified by \fIuri\fP create a snapshot named \fIsnapshot\fP of the domain specified by its UUID \fIdomain\fP.
.TP
\fBunivention\-virtual\-machine\-manager snap_delete\fP \fIuri\fP \fIdomain\fP \fIsnapshot\fP
On the virtualization server specified by \fIuri\fP delete the snapshot named \fIsnapshot\fP of the domain specified by its UUID \fIdomain\fP.
.TP
\fBunivention\-virtual\-machine\-manager snap_revert\fP \fIuri\fP \fIdomain\fP \fIsnapshot\fP
On the virtualization server specified by \fIuri\fP revert the domain specified by its UUID \fIdomain\fP back to the snapshot named \fIsnapshot\fP.
This will destroy the current state of the domain!

.SS Storage management
.TP
\fBunivention\-virtual\-machine\-manager pools\fP \fIuri\fP
Return the names of all storage-pools on the virtualization server
specified by \fIuri\fP.
.TP
\fBunivention\-virtual\-machine\-manager volume_define\fP \fIuri\fP \fIpool\fP \fIname\fP \fIsize\fP
Create a new storage-volume named \fIname\fP and the size \fIsize\fP in bytes
in the storage-pool named \fIpool\fP on the virtualization server specified by
\fIuri\fP.
.TP
\fBunivention\-virtual\-machine\-manager volumes\fP \fIuri\fP \fIpool\fP [\fItype\fP]
Return the names of all storage-volumes on the virtualization server
specified by \fIuri\fP in the storage-pool named \fIpool\fP.
\fItype\fP can be used to limit the volumes to a specific type; valid
values are \fBdisk\fP, \fBcdrom\fP, \fBfloppy\fP.

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
\fBunivention\-virtual\-machine\-manager\fP groups
List the known groups. 
.TP
\fBunivention\-virtual\-machine\-manager\fP nodes default
List the known nodes in the \fIdefaults\fP group.
.TP
\fBunivention\-virtual\-machine\-manager\fP query qemu://qemu.server.local/system
Query the state of server \fIqemu://qemu.server.local/system\fP.

.SH FILES
.TP
.I /var/run/uvmm.socket

.SH BUGS
This tool is very low-level.
.br
Bugs can be reported using the Univention Bugzilla bug-tracker at
.BR https://forge.univention.org/bugzilla/enter_bug.cgi?product=UCS&component=Virtual+Machine+Manager+(UVMM) .

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR univention\-virtual\-machine\-manager\-daemon (8),
.BR https://wiki.univention.de/index.php?title=UVMM ,
.BR virsh (1).

.SH AUTHOR
Copyright (c) 2009-2019 Univention GmbH, Germany
