.\" @(#)man/man8/mapscrn.8	1.0 3/19/93 17:04:00
.TH MAPSCRN 8 "20 March 1993" "Local" "International Support"
.SH NAME
mapscrn \- load screen output mapping table
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BR mapscrn " [" -v "] [" -o
.IR map.orig ]
.I mapfile
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B mapscrn
command is obsolete - its function is now built-in into setfont.
However, for backwards compatibility it is still available
as a separate command.
.LP
The
.I mapscrn
command loads a user defined output character mapping table into the
console driver. The console driver may be later put into
.B use user-defined mapping table
mode by outputting a special escape sequence to the console device.
This sequence is
.I <esc>(K
for the
.B G0 
character set and
.I <esc>)K
for the
.B G1
character set.
When the
.I -o
option is given, the old map is saved in
.I map.orig.
.SH USE
There are two kinds of mapping tables: direct-to-font tables,
that give a font position for each user byte value, and user-to-unicode
tables that give a unicode value for each user byte. The corresponding
glyph is now found using the unicode index of the font.
The command
.RS
mapscrn trivial
.RE
sets up a one-to-one direct-to-font table where user bytes
directly address the font. This is useful for fonts that are
in the same order as the character set one uses.
A command like
.RS
mapscrn 8859-2
.RE
sets up a user-to-unicode table that assumes that the user
uses ISO 8859-2.
.SH "INPUT FORMAT"
The
.I mapscrn
command can read the map in either of two formats:
.br
1. 256 or 512 bytes binary data
.br
2. two-column text file
.br
Format (1) is a direct image of the translation 
.I table. The 256-bytes tables are direct-to-font,
the 512-bytes tables are user-to-unicode tables.
Format (2) is used to fill the 
.I table
as follows: cell with offset mentioned in the first column is filled
with the value mentioned in the second column.
When values larger than 255 occur, or values are written using
the U+xxxx notation, the table is assumed to be a user-to-unicode
table, otherwise it is a direct-to-font table.
.PP
Values in the file may be specified in one of several
.B formats:
.br
.B 1. Decimal: 
String of decimal digits not starting with '0'
.br
.B 2. Octal: 
String of octal digits beginning with '0'.
.br
.B 3. Hexadecimal: 
String of hexadecimal digits preceded by "0x".
.br
.B 4. Unicode:
String of four hexadecimal digits preceded by "U+".
.br
.B 5. Character: 
Single character enclosed in single quotes. (And the binary value is used.)
Note that blank, comma, tab character and '#' cannot be specified
with this format.
.br
.B 6. UTF-8 Character:
Single (possibly multi-byte) UTF-8 character, enclosed in single quotes.
.PP
Note that control characters (with codes < 32) cannot be re-mapped with
.I mapscrn
because they have special meaning for the driver.
.SH FILES
.I /usr/share/kbd/consoletrans
is the default directory for screen mappings.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IR setfont (8)
.SH AUTHOR
Copyright (C) 1993 Eugene G. Crosser
.br
<crosser@pccross.msk.su>
.br
This software and documentation may be distributed freely.
