.\" $Header: /aolnet/dev/src/CVS/sgml/docbook-to-man/cmd/docbook-to-man.sh,v 1.1.1.1 1998/11/13 21:31:59 db3l Exp $
.\"
.\"	transcript compatibility for postscript use.
.\"
.\"	synopsis:  .P! <file.ps>
.\"
.de P!
.fl
\!!1 setgray
.fl
\\&.\"
.fl
\!!0 setgray
.fl			\" force out current output buffer
\!!save /psv exch def currentpoint translate 0 0 moveto
\!!/showpage{}def
.fl			\" prolog
.sy sed -e 's/^/!/' \\$1\" bring in postscript file
\!!psv restore
.
.de pF
.ie     \\*(f1 .ds f1 \\n(.f
.el .ie \\*(f2 .ds f2 \\n(.f
.el .ie \\*(f3 .ds f3 \\n(.f
.el .ie \\*(f4 .ds f4 \\n(.f
.el .tm ? font overflow
.ft \\$1
..
.de fP
.ie     !\\*(f4 \{\
.	ft \\*(f4
.	ds f4\"
'	br \}
.el .ie !\\*(f3 \{\
.	ft \\*(f3
.	ds f3\"
'	br \}
.el .ie !\\*(f2 \{\
.	ft \\*(f2
.	ds f2\"
'	br \}
.el .ie !\\*(f1 \{\
.	ft \\*(f1
.	ds f1\"
'	br \}
.el .tm ? font underflow
..
.ds f1\"
.ds f2\"
.ds f3\"
.ds f4\"
'\" t 
.ta 8n 16n 24n 32n 40n 48n 56n 64n 72n  
.TH "modinfo" "8" 
.SH "NAME" 
modinfo \(em program to show information about a Linux Kernel module 
.SH "SYNOPSIS" 
.PP 
\fBmodinfo\fR [\fB-0\fP]  [\fB-F \fIfield\fR\fP]  [modulename|filename \&...]  
.PP 
\fBmodinfo -V\fR 
.PP 
\fBmodinfo -h\fR 
.SH "DESCRIPTION" 
.PP 
\fBmodinfo\fR extracts information from the Linux 
Kernel modules given on the command line.  If the module name is 
not a filename, then the 
\fB/lib/modules/\fP\fIversion\fR       directory is searched, as done by 
\fBmodprobe\fP\fB(8)\fP. 
 
.PP 
\fBmodinfo\fR by default lists each attribute 
of the module in form \fIfieldname\fR : 
\fIvalue\fR, for easy reading.  The 
filename is listed the same way (although it's not really an 
attribute). 
 
.PP 
This version of \fBmodinfo\fR can understand 
modules of any Linux Kernel architecture. 
.SH "OPTIONS" 
.IP "\fB-V\fP \fB--version\fP         " 10 
Print the modinfo version.  Note BACKWARDS COMPATIBILITY 
below: you might be printing the version of 
\fBmodinfo.old\fR. 
 
.IP "\fB-F\fP \fB--field\fP         " 10 
Only print this field value, one per line.  This is most 
useful for scripts.  Field names are case-insenitive. 
Common fields (which may not be in every module) include 
\fBauthor\fP, \fBdescription\fP, 
\fBlicense\fP, \fBparam\fP, 
\fBdepends\fP, and \fBalias\fP. 
There are often multiple \fBparam\fP, 
\fBalias\fP and \fBdepends\fP 	    fields.  The special field \fBfilename\fP 	    lists the filename of the module. 
 
.IP "\fB-0\fP \fB--null\fP         " 10 
Use the ASCII zero character to separate field values, 
instead of a new line.  This is useful for scripts, since 
a new line can theoretically appear inside a field. 
 
.IP "\fB-a\fP \fB-d\fP \fB-l\fP \fB-p\fP \fB-n\fP         " 10 
These are shortcuts for \fBauthor\fP, 
\fBdescription\fP, 
\fBlicense\fP.  \fBparam\fP and 
\fBfilename\fP respectively, to ease the 
transition from the old modutils 
\fBmodinfo\fR. 
 
.SH "BACKWARDS COMPATIBILITY" 
.PP 
This version of \fBmodinfo\fR is for kernel 
modules \fB2.5.48\fP and above.  If it detects a 
kernel with support for old-style modules, it will attempt to 
run \fBmodprobe.old\fR in its place, so it is 
completely transparent to the user. 
.PP 
Note that the output of this version of 
\fBmodinfo\fR is simpler and more regular than 
the older version: scripts attempting to use the default 
output may get confused with complex fields. 
 
.PP 
You can force the new \fBmodinfo\fR to always 
be used, by setting the \fBNEW_MODINFO\fP 	environment variable. 
 
.SH "COPYRIGHT" 
.PP 
This manual page Copyright 2003, Rusty Russell, IBM Corporation. 
 
.SH "SEE ALSO" 
.PP 
\fBmodprobe\fP\fB(8)\fP, 
\fBmodinfo.old\fP\fB(8)\fP 
.\" created by instant / docbook-to-man, Tue 09 Mar 2004, 08:43 
