.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.TH UNIVENTION-INSTALL-CONFIG-REGISTRY-INFO 1 2012-08-01 UCS

.SH NAME
univention\-install\-config\-registry\-info \- install UCR variable description into package build directories

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B univention\-install\-config\-registry\-info

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B univention\-install\-config\-registry\-info
is a debhelper like program that is responsible for installing univention config registry (UCR) variable and category descriptions.

.SH FILES
.TP
debian/\fIpackage\fP.univention\-config\-registry\-variables
Describe the UCR variables.
The file itself is installed in \fI/etc/univention/registry.info/variables/*.cfg\fP.
.TP
debian/\fIpackage\fP.univention\-config\-registry\-categories
Describes the categories used to group related UCR variables.
The file itself is installed in \fI/etc/univention/registry.info/categories/*.cfg\fP.

.SH EXAMPLES
A variable description file consists of multiple entries separated by one blank line.
Each entry has the following format:
.RS 5
.nf
[top_level/sub_level/variable_name]
Description[de]=Beschreibung
Description[en]=Description
Type=str|bool|int (currently unused)
ReadOnly=yes|no
Categories=Management|...
.fi
.RE
.IP \fB[\fP\fItop_level/sub_level/variable_name\fP\fB]\fP
Name of the UCR-variable.
Only the regular expression "\fB.*\fP" can be used inside the name to match multiple variables.
.IP \fBdescription\fP[\fIlanguage\fP]\fB=\fP\fItext\fP
Description for the service for different languages.
.IP \fBType=\fP\fItype\fP
Type of the variable used for syntax checking, currently unused.
On of \fBstr\fP (for string), \fBbool\fP (for boolean), \fBint\fP (for integer).
.IP \fBReadOnly=\fP\fIbool\fP
Mark the variable as unmodifiable in UMC. By default variables are modifiable.
.IP \fBCategories=\fP\fIstring\fP.
Category the UCR-variable belongs to.
Currently used values are:
.RS 5
AD\-Connector, Connector\-Notes, Desktop, digitemp, LDAP, Mail, Management, management\-udm, management\-umc, Misc, Network, Printing, Samba, service\-adcon, service\-apache, service\-apache, system\-services, service\-backup, service\-bind, service\-bind, system\-services, service\-cups, service\-dhcp, service\-dhcp, system\-services, service\-heimdal, service\-ldap, service\-mail, service\-mail, system\-network, service\-mail, system\-services, service\-nagios, service\-nagios, system\-services, service\-pkgdb, service\-proxy, service\-samba, service\-software\-management, service\-ssh, service\-webproxy, service\-xen, SSL, System, system\-base, system\-desktop, system\-locale, system\-network, system\-services, system\-ssl, system\-swmon, uvmm
.RE
.P
A category description file consists of multiple service entries separated by one blank line.
Each entry has the following format:
.RS 5
.nf
[category_name]
name[de]=Name
name[en]=Name
icon=icon.gif
.fi
.RE
.IP \fB[\fP\fIcategory_name\fP\fB]\fP
Name of the UCR-variable category.
.IP \fBname\fP[\fIlanguage\fP]\fB=\fP\fItext\fP
Name for the category for different languages.
.IP \fBicon=\fP\fIfile-name\fP
The name of an file containing an icon for the category.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.IP "\s-1DH_VERBOSE\s0" 4
Set to 1 to enable verbose mode.
Debhelper will output every command it runs that modifies files on the build system.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR univention\-install\-config\-registry (1),
.BR univention\-install\-service\-info (1),
.BR debhelper (7).
.br
This program is documented fully in the
.IR "Univention Corporate Server Manual" .

.SH AUTHOR
Copyright (c) 2011-2019 Univention GmbH, Germany
