.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.TH UNIVENTION-INSTALL-SERVICE-INFO 1 2012-08-01 UCS

.SH NAME
univention\-install\-service\-info \- install UCS service description files into package build directories

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B univention\-install\-service\-info

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B univention\-install\-service\-info
is a debhelper like program that is responsible for installing a service description file.

.SH FILES
.TP
debian/\fIpackage\fP.univention\-service
Describe the services of the package.
The file itself is installed in \fI/etc/univention/service.info/services/*.cfg\fP.

.SH EXAMPLES
A service description file consists of multiple service entries separated by one blank line.
Each entry has the following format:
.RS 5
.nf
[service_name]
description[de]=Beschreibung
description[en]=Description
start_type=service_name/autostart
icon=service/icon_name
programs=/usr/sbin/executable
.fi
.RE
.IP \fB[\fP\fIservice_name\fP\fB]\fP
Starts the description of the service.
.IP \fBdescription\fP[\fIlanguage\fP]\fB=\fP\fItext\fP
Description for the service for different languages.
.IP \fBstart_type=\fP\fIvariable\fP
Name of the Univention Config Registry-variable used to control if the service should be started automatically, manually or never.
Defaults to \fIservice_name\fP\fB/autostart\fP.
.IP \fBicon=\fP\fIname\fP
Name for an icon relative to \fI???\fP.
.B Unused!
.IP \fBprograms=\fP\fIname\fP[\fI,...\fP]
Names of the executables, which must be running to flag this service as running.
.IP \fBname=\fP\fIservice_name\fP
The name of the service.
Defaults to \fIservice_name\fP as used in the section header of the entry.
.IP \fBsystemd=\fP\fIunit\fP[\fB.service\fP]
Name of the systemd unit used to start, stop, and restart the service.
Defaults to \fIname\fP.
.IP \fBinit_script=\fP\fIname\fP
Name of the SystemV init script \fB/etc/init.d/\fP\fIname\fP to use instead of the systemd unit.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.IP "\s-1DH_VERBOSE\s0" 4
Set to \fB1\fP to enable verbose mode.
Debhelper will output every command it runs that modifies files on the build system.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR univention\-install\-config\-registry\-info (1),
.BR univention\-install\-config\-registry (1),
.BR debhelper (7).
.br
This program is documented fully in the
.IR "Univention Corporate Server Manual" .

.SH AUTHOR
Copyright (c) 2011-2019 Univention GmbH, Germany
