.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.TH UNIVENTION-CONFIG-REGISTRY 8 2012-08-01 UCS

.SH NAME
univention\-config\-registry \- base configuration for UCS

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B univention\-config\-registry
.RI [ global-options ]\ < action >\ [ action-specific-options ]\ [ parameters ]
.br
.B ucr
.RI [ global-options ]\ < action >\ [ action-specific-options ]\ [ parameters ]

.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page documents briefly the
.B univention\-config\-registry
command.
It is a tool to handle the basic configuration for UCS.

.SH OPTIONS
A summary of options is included below.
.TP
.BR \-h ,\  \-\-help ,\  \-?
Print usage message and exit the program.
.TP
.BR \-v ,\  \-\-version
Print version information and exit program.
.TP
.B \-\-shell
Convert key/value pair into shell compatible format, e.g.
.RS
`version/version: 1.0` => `version_version="1.0"`
.br
Only valid for the \fBdump\fP and \fBsearch\fP actions.
.RE
.TP
.B \-\-keys-only
Print only the keys, not the values.
Only valid for the \fBdump\fP and \fBsearch\fP actions.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
\fBset\fP [\fB\-\-forced\fP|\fB\-\-schedule\fP|\fB\-\-ldap-policy\fP] \fIkey\fP=\fIvalue\fP [... \fIkey\fP=\fIvalue\fP]
Set one or more \fIkeys\fP to specified \fIvalues\fP; if a \fIkey\fP is non-existent in the configuration registry it will be created.
.br
Keys can also be set conditionally by using a question mark ("\fB?\fP") instead of an equal sign ("\fB=\fP") between \fIkey\fP and \fIvalue\fP:
If the \fIkey\fP does already exist, it is not modified.
.TP
.BI get\  key
Retrieve the value of the specified \fIkey\fP from the configuration database.
.TP
\fBunset\fP [\fB\-\-forced\fP|\fB\-\-schedule\fP|\fB\-\-ldap-policy\fP] \fIkey\fP [... \fIkey\fP]
Remove one or more \fIkeys\fP (and its associated values) from configuration database.
.TP
.B dump
Display all key/value pairs which are stored in the configuration database.
.TP
\fBsearch\fP [\fB\-\-key\fP|\fB\-\-value\fP|\fB\-\-all\fP] [\fB\-\-category\fP \fIcategory\fP] [\fB\-\-brief\fP|\fB\-\-verbose\fP] [\fB\-\-non-empty\fP] [\fIregex\fP ...]
Displays all key/value pairs and their descriptions that match at least one of the given \fIregular expressions\fP.
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-key
Only search the keys (default).
.TP
.B \-\-value
Only search the values.
.TP
.B \-\-all
Search keys, values and descriptions.
.TP
.BI \-\-category\  category
Limit search to variables of \fIcategory\fP.
.TP
.B \-\-brief
Don't print descriptions (can be enabled by default via \fBucr/output/brief\fP).
.TP
.B \-\-verbose
Undo \fB\-\-brief\fP and also print categories for each variable.
.TP
.B \-\-non-empty
Only search in non-empty variables.
.TP
No \fIregex\fP given
Display all variables.
.RE
.TP
\fBinfo\fP \fIkey\fP [... \fIkey\fP]
Display verbose information for the specified variable(s).
.TP
\fBshell\fP [\fIkey\fP]:
Convert \fIkey\fP/value pair into shell compatible format, e.g.
.RS
`version/version: 1.0` => `version_version="1.0"`
.br
(deprecated: use \fB\-\-shell dump\fP instead)
.RE
.TP
\fBcommit\fP [\fIfile1\fP ...]
Rebuild configuration \fIfile\fP from univention template;
if no \fIfile\fP is specified ALL configuration files are rebuilt.
.TP
\fBfilter\fP [\fB\-\-encode\-utf8\fP] [<\fIfile\fP]
Evaluate a template \fIfile\fP, optionally expect Python inline code in UTF-8.
(the \fB\-\-encode-utf8\fP option is deprecated and enabled by default)

.SS Additional commands
.TP
\fBregister\fP \fIfile.info\fP
Register a new \fI.info\fP file describing additional templates. See
.BR univention-install-config-registry (1)
for additional information.
.TP
\fBunregister\fP \fIfile.info\fP
Un-register an \fI.info\fP file describing templates. See
.BR univention-install-config-registry (1)
for additional information.
.TP
\fBupdate\fP
Update the internal cache of all \fI.info\fP files describing templates.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR univention\-admin (8),
.BR udm (8).
.br
This program is documented fully in the
.IR "Univention Corporate Server Manual" .

.SH AUTHOR
Copyright (c) 2001-2019 Univention GmbH, Germany
