=head1 NAME

Net::LDAP::Message - Message response from LDAP server

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 use Net::LDAP;

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<Net::LDAP::Message> is a base class for the objects returned by the
L<Net::LDAP> methods
L<abandon|Net::LDAP/item_abandon>,
L<add|Net::LDAP/item_add>,
L<bind|Net::LDAP/item_bind>,
L<compare|Net::LDAP/item_compare>,
L<delete|Net::LDAP/item_delete>,
L<modify|Net::LDAP/item_modify>,
L<moddn|Net::LDAP/item_moddn>,
L<search|Net::LDAP/item_search> and
L<unbind|Net::LDAP/item_unbind>.

The sub-class L<Net::LDAP::Search> returned by
L<search|Net::LDAP/item_search> also defines many methods.

If the L<Net::LDAP> object is in async mode then all these methods,
except C<done>, will cause a wait until the request is completed.

=head1 METHODS

=over 4

=item code ( )

The code value in the result message from the server. Normally for a
success zero will be returned. Constants for the result codes can be
imported from the L<Net::LDAP> or L<Net::LDAP::Constant> module.

=item control ( )

Return a list of controls that were returned from the server.

=item control ( OID, ... )

Return a list of controls with the given OIDs that were returned from
the server.

=item dn ( )

The DN in the result message from the server.

=item done ( )

Returns I<true> if the request has been completed.

=item error ( )

Returns the error message in the result message from the server. If
the server did not include an error message, then the result of
L<ldap_error_desc|Net::LDAP::Util/ldap_error_desc> with the error code
from the result message.

=item error_name ( )

Returns the name of the error code in the result message from the
server. See L<ldap_error_name|Net::LDAP::Util::ldap_error_name> for a
detailed description of the return value.

=item error_text ( )

Returns the short text description of the error code in the result
message from the server. See
L<ldap_error_text|Net::LDAP::Util::ldap_error_text> for a detailed
description of the return value.

=item error_desc ( )

Returns a long text description of the error code in the result
message from the server. See
L<ldap_error_desc|Net::LDAP::Util::ldap_error_desc> for a detailed
description of the return value.

=item is_error ( )

Returns I<true> if the result code is considered to be an error for
the operation.

=item mesg_id ( )

The message id of the request message sent to the server.

=item referrals ( )

Returns a list of referrals from the result message.

=item server_error ( )

The error message returned by the server, or C<undef> if the server
did not provide a message.

=item sync ( )

Wait for the server to complete the request.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<Net::LDAP>,
L<Net::LDAP::Search>,
L<Net::LDAP::Constant>,
L<Net::LDAP::Util>

=head1 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This document is based on a document originally written by Russell
Fulton E<lt>r.fulton@auckland.ac.nzE<gt>.

=head1 AUTHOR

Graham Barr E<lt>gbarr@pobox.comE<gt>

Please report any bugs, or post any suggestions, to the perl-ldap
mailing list E<lt>perl-ldap@perl.orgE<gt>.

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (c) 1997-2004 Graham Barr. All rights reserved. This program
is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the
same terms as Perl itself.

=cut
