=head1 NAME

Net::LDAP::Search - Object returned by Net::LDAP search method

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 use Net::LDAP;

 $mesg = $ldap->search( @search_args );

 @entries = $mesg->entries;

=head1 DESCRIPTION

A B<Net::LDAP::Search> object is returned from the
L<search|Net::LDAP/item_search> method of a L<Net::LDAP> object. It is
a container object which holds the results of the search.

=head1 METHODS

B<Net::LDAP::Search> inherits from L<Net::LDAP::Message>, and so
supports all methods defined in L<Net::LDAP::Message>.

=over 4

=item as_struct ( )

Returns a reference to a HASH, where the keys are the DNs of the
results and the values are HASH references. These second level HASHes
hold the attributes such that the keys are the attribute names, in
lowercase, and the values are references to an ARRAY holding the
values.

This method will block until the whole search request has finished.

=item count ( )

Returns the number of entries returned by the server.

This method will block until the whole search request has finished.

=item entry ( INDEX )

Return the N'th entry, which will be a L<Net::LDAP::Entry> object. If
INDEX is greater than the total number of entries returned then
C<undef> will be returned.

This method will block until the search request has returned enough
entries.

=item entries ( )

Return an array of L<Net::LDAP::Entry> objects that were returned from
the server.

This method will block until the whole search request has finished.

=item pop_entry ( )

Pop an entry from the internal list of L<Net::LDAP::Entry> objects for
this search. If there are no more entries then C<undef> is returned.

This call will block if the list is empty, until the server returns
another entry.

=item references ( )

Return a list of references that the server returned. This will be a
list of L<Net::LDAP::Reference> objects.

=item sorted ( )

Return a list L<Net::LDAP:Entry> objects, sorted by their DNs.

=item sorted ( ATTR, ... )

Return a list of L<Net::LDAP::Entry> objects, sorted by the specified
attributes. The attributes are compared in the order specified, each
only being compared if all the prior attributes compare equal.

=item shift_entry ( )

Shift an entry from the internal list of L<Net::LDAP::Entry> objects
for this search. If there are no more entries then C<undef> is
returned.

This call will block if the list is empty, until the server returns
another entry.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<Net::LDAP>,
L<Net::LDAP::Message>,
L<Net::LDAP::Entry>,
L<Net::LDAP::Reference>

=head1 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This document is based on a document originally written by Russell
Fulton E<lt>r.fulton@auckland.ac.nzE<gt>.

=head1 AUTHOR

Graham Barr E<lt>gbarr@pobox.comE<gt>

Please report any bugs, or post any suggestions, to the perl-ldap
mailing list E<lt>perl-ldap@perl.orgE<gt>.

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (c) 1997-2004 Graham Barr. All rights reserved. This program
is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the
same terms as Perl itself.

=cut
