.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.TH UNIVENTION-DIRECTORY-REPORT 1 2011-02-11 UCS

.SH NAME
univention\-directory\-reports \- generate report over UDM objects

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B univention\-directory\-reports
.RI [ options ]
.BI \-m\  module
.IR dn1 ...

.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page documents briefly the
.B univention\-directory\-reports
command.
It is a tool to generate a report over UDM objects stored in the LDAP tree.
Currently supported output formats include Comma Separated Values (CSV) and PDF generated through RML or LaTeX.

.SH OPTIONS
A summary of options is included below.
.TP
\fB\-h\fP, \fB\-\-help\fP
Show a help message and exit.
.TP
\fB\-u\fP \fIUSERDN\fP, \fB\-\-user=\fP\fIUSERDN\fP
Distinguished Name \fIbinddn\fP used for LDAP simple authentication.
.TP
\fB\-p\fP \fIPASSWORD\fP, \fB\-\-password=\fP\fIPASSWORD\fP
Password for LDAP simple authentication.
.TP
\fB\-H\fP \fIHEADER\fP, \fB\-\-header=\fP\fIHEADER\fP
File containing the header for the report.
.TP
\fB\-F\fP \fIFOOTER\fP, \fB\-\-footer=\fP\fIFOOTER\fP
File containing the footer for the report.
.TP
\fB\-s\fP \fISERVER\fP, \fB\-\-server=\fP\fISERVER\fP
Name of the LDAP server.
.TP
\fB\-b\fP \fIBASE\fP, \fB\-\-base=\fP\fIBASE\fP
Use searchbase as the starting point for the search instead of the default.
.TP
\fB\-m\fP \fIMODULE\fP, \fB\-\-module=\fP\fIMODULE\fP
Admin module defining the report to generate.
Use \fB-l\fP to list the available modules.
.TP
\fB\-r\fP \fIREPORT\fP, \fB\-\-report=\fP\fIREPORT\fP
Name of the report to use.
Use \fB-l\fP to list the available reports.
.TP
\fB-l\fP, \fB--list\fP
List names of available modules and reports.
.TP
\fB\-c\fP \fICONFIG\fP, \fB\-\-config=\fP\fICONFIG\fP
Location of an alternative configuration file.
.TP
\fB\-d\fP \fIDEBUG\fP, \fB\-\-debug=\fP\fIDEBUG\fP
If given than debugging is activated and set to the specified level.

.SH UNIVENTION CONFIG REGISTRY VARIABLES
.TP
.B directory/reports/default
Name of the default report when not explicitly specified using \fB\-r\fP.
.TP
.BR directory/reports/templates/pdf/ ...,\  directory/reports/templates/csv/ ...
Definition of registered templates, each a space separated 3- or 4-tuple
specifying the \fImodule\fP, \fIreport name\fP and \fItemplate file\fP or ...
\fItemplate base directory\fP and \fItemplate base file name\fP, where the
\fIlocale\fP is inserted in between.
Shell-quoting can be used to include spaces in the \fIreport name\fP, e.g.
.IP
.RS 10
module/name "My Report" /usr/local/share/my_template.csv
.br
module/name "My Report" /usr/local/share my_template.csv
.RE
.IP
The second entry will be expanded to \fI/usr/local/share/$LANG/my_template.csv\fP.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
LANG
Defines locatisation for reports.

.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/univention/directory/reports/config.ini
Configuration file defining defaults and available reports.
This file is auto-generated from the Univention Config Registry settings.
.TP
.IR /etc/univention/directory/reports/.../$LANG/header.tex ,\  /etc/univention/directory/reports/header.tex
Default header for LaTeX reports.
The first path will only be used for localized templates.
.TP
.IR /etc/univention/directory/reports/.../$LANG/footer.tex ,\  /etc/univention/directory/reports/footer.tex
Default footer for LaTeX reports.
The first path will only be used for localized templates.

.SH BUG
The \fIDN\fPs must be specified on the command line, possibly using
.BR univention\-directory\-manager (8)
or
.BR ldapsearch (1)
to retrieve the \fIDN\fPs of the wanted objects.

.SH EXAMPLE
.nf
IFS=$'\\n'
univention-directory-reports -m computers/computer \\
$(udm computers/computer list | sed -ne 's/^DN: //p')
.fi

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR univention\-directory\-manager (8),
.BR univention\-directory\-reports (5),
.BR ldapsearch (1).
.br
This program is documented fully in the
.IR "Univention Corporate Server Manual" .

.SH AUTHOR
Copyright (c) 2011-2019 Univention GmbH, Germany
