.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.TH UNIVENTION-DIRECTORY-REPORT 5 2011-02-14 UCS
.SH NAME
univention\-directory\-reports \- template for reports over UDM objects

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B univention\-directory\-reports \-l

.SH DESCRIPTION
.TP
\fB<@attribute\fP [\fBprepend="\fP\fIprefix\fP\fB"\fP] \fBname="\fP\fIname\fP\fB"\fP [\fBappend="\fP\fIsuffix\fP\fB"\fP] [\fBdefault="\fP\fIvalue\fP\fB"\fP] \fB@>\fP
Output the value of the attribute named \fIname\fP, optionally prepended with the text \fIprefix\fP and appended with the text \fIsuffix\fP.
Default can be used to supply a default \fIvalue\fP if the attribute is unset.
.TP
\fB<@header@>\fP...\fB<@/header@>\fP
Everything in between in put in front of the report, but after the LaTeX header.
.TP
\fB<@footer@>\fP...\fB<@/footer@>\fP
Everything in between in put at the end after the report, but before the LaTeX footer.
.TP
\fB<@resolve module="\fP\fImodule\fP\fB" dn-attribute="\fP\fIattribute\fP\fB"\fP [\fBalternative="\fP\fItext\fP\fB"\fP] [\fBseparator="\fP\fIsep\fP\fB"\fP] [\fBheader="\fP\fIheader\fP\fB"\fP] [\fBfooter="\fP\fIfooter\fP\fB"\fP] \fB@>\fP...\fB<@/resolve@>\fP
Looks up the entry, whos distinguished name equals the value of \fIattribute\fP using the module \fImodule\fP.
For each entry, the templates between \fB<@resolve@>\fP and \fB<@/resolve@>\fP are evaluated.
If no such object exists, \fBalternative\fP specifies a \fItext\fP used instead.
If multiple objects exists, \fBseperator\fP specifies a \fIseparator\fP, which is printed in between the entries.
\fIheader\fP and \fIfooter\fP can be used to print additional text before the first and after the last entry.
.TP
\fB<@query module="\fP\fImodule\fP\fB" start="\fP\fIstart\fP\fB"\fP \fBnext="\fP\fInext\fP\fB"\fP [\fBregex="\fP\fIregex\fP\fB"\fP] [\fBseparator="\fP\fIsep\fP\fB"\fP] [\fBalternative="\fP\fItext\fP\fB"\fP] [\fBheader="\fP\fIheader\fP\fB"\fP] [\fBfooter="\fP\fIfooter\fP\fB"\fP] \fB@>\fP...\fB<@/query@>\fP
Executes a recursive for entries handled by the module \fImodule\fP.
Initially the \fIstart\fP attribute is used to get the distinguished name of the first entry, while the \fInext\fP attribute is then used recursively to find all nested entries.
Only entries matching \fIregex\fP are handled.
For each entry, the templates between \fB<@resolve@>\fP and \fB<@/resolve@>\fP are evaluated.
If no such object exists, \fBalternative\fP specifies a \fItext\fP used instead.
If multiple objects exists, \fBseperator\fP specifies a \fIseparator\fP, which is printed in between the entries.
\fIheader\fP and \fIfooter\fP can be used to print additional text before the first and after the last entry.
.TP
\fB<@policy@ module="\fP\fImodule\fP\fB"\fP [\fBinherited=""\fP|\fBdirect=""\fP] \fB@>\fP
Signals, if the entry has an associated policy of type \fImodule\fP.
Either \fBinherited=""\fP or \fBdirect=""\fP should be specified, if respectively \fBYes\fP should be printed when the policy is inherited or not.

.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/univention/directory/reports/config.ini
Configuration file defining defaults and available reports.
This file is auto-generated from the Univention Config Registry settings.
.TP
.IR /etc/univention/directory/reports/.../$LANG/header.tex ,\  /etc/univention/directory/reports/header.tex
Default header for LaTeX reports.
.TP
.IR /etc/univention/directory/reports/.../$LANG/footer.tex ,\  /etc/univention/directory/reports/footer.tex
Default footer for LaTeX reports.

.SH EXAMPLE
.RS 5
.nf
<@header@>
Text at the beginning.
<@/header@>
The value of attribute 'name' is '<@attribute name="name"@>'
<@footer@>
Text at the end.
<@/footer@>
.fi
.RE

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR univention\-directory\-reports (1),
.BR univention\-config\-registry (8),

.SH AUTHOR
Copyright (c) 2011-2019 Univention GmbH, Germany
