.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.TH UNIVENTION-SSH 8 2011-05-16 UCS

.SH NAME
univention\-ssh \- OpenSSH password wrapper

.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBunivention\-ssh\fP [\fIoptions\fP] \fIpassword-file\fP [\fIssh-options\fP] [\fIuser\fP\fB@\fP]\fIhost\fP [\fIcommand\fP...]
.br
\fBunivention\-scp\fP [\fIoptions\fP] \fIpassword-file\fP [\fIscp-options\fP] \fIfiles\fP... [\fIuser\fP\fB@\fP]\fIhost\fP\fB:\fP[\fIpath\fP]
.br
\fBunivention\-ssh\-rsync\fP [\fIoptions\fP] \fIpassword-file\fP [\fIrsync-options\fP] \fIfiles\fP... [\fIuser\fP\fB@\fP]\fIhost\fP\fB:\fP[\fIpath\fP]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.BR univention\-ssh ,
.BR univention\-scp ,
and
.B univention\-ssh-rsync
are wrapper programs to use OpenSSH and other tools with plain text password authentication.

.SH OPTIONS
A summary of options is included below.
.TP
.BR \-h ,\  \-\-help ,\  \-?
Print usage message and exit the program.
.TP
.BI \-timeout \ seconds
Specify a \fItimeout\fP in seconds, after with the
.BR ssh (1)
connection is forcefully terminated.
.TP
.BR \-\-no\-split
Previous versions of this wrapper locally used an intermediate shell to start the ssh command, which performed one extra level of word splitting (See
.BR sh (1)
for more information).
This new version can directly invoke the respective command, which simplifies argument quoting.
For backward compatibility this is disabled by default, which results in all arguments first being joined by a single white-space-character, before being split again using \fIshlex\fP on any white-space-character.
.br
Enabling this option disables this backward compatible processing and directly passes all arguments as-is to
.BR ssh (1),
.BR scp (1),\ or
.BR rsynv (1).
.br
Note:
Using ssh still invokes a shell at the remote host using its \fB\-c\fP option, so arguments must be properly quoted to not be expanded by the remote shell!

.SH EXAMPLES
Without the \fB\-\-no\-split\fP option, the arguments are first locally split, and then again by the remote shell:
.RS
.nf
# univention-ssh ~/.secret.password user@remote '~/src/toolshed/dump-cmd " 1 2"'
$1="1"
$2="2"
.fi
.RE
Adding \fB\-\-no\-split\fP instead calls the program with a single argument:
.RS
.nf
# univention-ssh \-\-no\-split ~/.secret.password user@remote '~/src/toolshed/dump-cmd " 1 2"'
$1=" 1 2"
.fi
.RE
Reading the password from STDIN also works:
.RS
.nf
# echo 'secret' | univention-ssh /dev/stdin user@remote command
.fi
.RE

.SH BUGS
Storing plain text passwords unencrypted in a file is a security risk.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ssh (1),
.BR scp (1),
.BR rsync (1).
.br
This program is documented fully in the
.IR "Univention Corporate Server Manual" .

.SH AUTHOR
Copyright (c) 2011-2019 Univention GmbH, Germany
