doc/architecture/index.rst, before:

.. _introduction:

************
Introduction
************

Welcome to the architecture documentation of Univention Corporate Server (UCS).

This document does not cover installation, the usage of UCS or parts of the
product. For instructions about how to install and use UCS, see the `UCS manual
<univention-ucs-manual_>`_.

.. TODO Remove this sentence once the whole document is done.

The document is released iteratively after each part is finished. The beginning
is at the first, high level.

Audience
========

This document is for consultants, administrators, solution architects, software
developers and system engineers. It describes the technical architecture of UCS
on three different detail levels.

The first, high level, :ref:`classifies UCS in the known IT world
<classification>` and describes the :ref:`concepts <concepts>`. This view helps
readers to understand the principles of UCS. Chapters 2 and 3 assume you are
familiar with information technology in general and that you have heard of
computer network building blocks and software.

.. TODO : Enable the references, once the sections are written:
   """covers the :ref:`product components <product-components>` and the :ref:`numerous
   services <services>` UCS offers to IT infrastructures.  Software developers and"""

The second, medium level, is for administrators and solution architects. It
covers the product components and the numerous services UCS offers to IT
infrastructures. You read about the user facing product components and what
services UCS runs. You learn what open source software contributes to the
functionality of UCS and how it interoperates together.

Software developers and system engineers get an overview of the technical parts.

A general understanding of Linux operating systems for servers and IT
administration are beneficial for understanding.

.. TODO : Enable the references, once the sections are written:
   """The third, low level is about the :ref:`libraries <libraries>`, :ref:`internal
   systems and storage <systems-storage>`. It describes the pieces a software"""

The third, low level is about the libraries, internal systems and storage. It
describes the pieces a software developer and system engineer needs to know to
contribute to UCS. General knowledge of software architecture and software
engineering are helpful at this level.

Learning objectives
===================

After reading this document you have a broad understanding of the UCS
architecture. It equips consultants, administrators and solution architects to
better plan their IT environment with UCS. It enables software developers and
system engineers to quicker dive into software development for UCS.

Commit message:

Bug #54353: Add hint about feedback

doc/architecture/index.rst, after:

.. _introduction:

************
Introduction
************

Welcome to the architecture documentation of Univention Corporate Server (UCS).

This document does not cover installation, the usage of UCS or parts of the
product. For instructions about how to install and use UCS, see the `UCS manual
<univention-ucs-manual_>`_.

.. TODO Remove this sentence once the whole document is done.

The document is released iteratively after each part is finished. The beginning
is at the first, high level.

Your feed is welcome and highly appreciated. If you have comments, suggestions,
or criticism, please send your `feedback
<https://www.univention.com/feedback/?architecture=generic>`_ for document
improvement.

Audience
========

This document is for consultants, administrators, solution architects, software
developers and system engineers. It describes the technical architecture of UCS
on three different detail levels.

The first, high level, :ref:`classifies UCS in the known IT world
<classification>` and describes the :ref:`concepts <concepts>`. This view helps
readers to understand the principles of UCS. Chapters 2 and 3 assume you are
familiar with information technology in general and that you have heard of
computer network building blocks and software.

.. TODO : Enable the references, once the sections are written:
   """covers the :ref:`product components <product-components>` and the :ref:`numerous
   services <services>` UCS offers to IT infrastructures.  Software developers and"""

The second, medium level, is for administrators and solution architects. It
covers the product components and the numerous services UCS offers to IT
infrastructures. You read about the user facing product components and what
services UCS runs. You learn what open source software contributes to the
functionality of UCS and how it interoperates together.

Software developers and system engineers get an overview of the technical parts.

A general understanding of Linux operating systems for servers and IT
administration are beneficial for understanding.

.. TODO : Enable the references, once the sections are written:
   """The third, low level is about the :ref:`libraries <libraries>`, :ref:`internal
   systems and storage <systems-storage>`. It describes the pieces a software"""

The third, low level is about the libraries, internal systems and storage. It
describes the pieces a software developer and system engineer needs to know to
contribute to UCS. General knowledge of software architecture and software
engineering are helpful at this level.

Learning objectives
===================

After reading this document you have a broad understanding of the UCS
architecture. It equips consultants, administrators and solution architects to
better plan their IT environment with UCS. It enables software developers and
system engineers to quicker dive into software development for UCS.
