doc/architecture/concepts/replication.rst, before:

.. _concept-replication:

Replication concept
===================

The replication concept ensures the availability and consistency of the central
domain database and contributes to its scalability. It is necessary to keep the
domain data synchronized across all domain controllers because more than one domain
controller can have a copy of the central database. For example single domain
controllers can get disconnected or need to shutdown for maintenance.

Univention Corporate Server (UCS) implements the replication concept. The first
domain controller in the domain has the following tasks:

* It writes domain object data to the database.
* It monitors changes to the database.
* It makes changes available to other domain controllers.

The other domain controllers have a read-only copy of the domain database.

.. TODO Activate reference once the section about domain replication is written in the listener part.

   What components are involved for replication and how it works in detail, see
   :ref:`services-listener-domain-replication`.

The replication synchronizes the following data types between domain
controllers:

* User identities
* Groups
* Policies
* Permissions
* Information about systems
* Information about printers
* Information about file shares

Commit message:

Bug #54353: Writer proof reading of concepts chapter
* Add links to terms: I don't think it is necessary to explain the terms
  DHCP and DNS. Nevertheless, a link to Wikipedia at this point helps
  readers who don't know the terms.

* Add constraints for Administrator and root account
* Rename domain controller to domain node

doc/architecture/concepts/replication.rst, after:

.. _concept-replication:

Replication concept
===================

The replication concept ensures the availability and consistency of the central
domain database and contributes to its scalability. It is necessary to keep the
domain data synchronized across all domain nodes because more than one domain
node can have a copy of the central database. For example domain
nodes can get disconnected or need to shutdown for maintenance.

Univention Corporate Server (UCS) implements the replication concept. The first
domain node in the domain has the following tasks:

* It writes domain object data to the database.
* It monitors changes to the database.
* It makes changes available to other domain nodes.

The other domain nodes have a read-only copy of the domain database.

.. TODO Activate reference once the section about domain replication is written in the listener part.

   What components are involved for replication and how it works in detail, see
   :ref:`services-listener-domain-replication`.

The replication synchronizes a lot of data types. The following list names a
few that domain nodes replicate and cannot cover all items:

* User identities
* Groups
* Policies
* Permissions
* Information about systems
* Information about printers
* Information about file shares

The domain replication in UCS also ensures that the affect UCS systems run
follow-up actions once the changes are replicated. The following example shows
the follow-up actions for a new file share:

#. An administrator creates a new file share.
#. The domain database stores a new object about the new file share.
#. The replication synchronizes this information to all domain controllers.
#. The responsible domain controller updates its service configuration about
   local file shares.
#. The file share service offers the new share to users.
