.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.TH UNIVENTION_POLICY_RESULT 1 2011-09-15 UCS
.SH NAME
univention_policy_result \- policy aggregator

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B univention_policy_result
.BI \fR[\fP\-h\  ldaphost \fR]\fP
.BI \fR[\fP\-D\  bind-dn \fR]\fP
[\fB\-w\fP \fIbind-password\fP | \fB\-y\fP \fIpassword-file\fP]
.RB [ \-s | \-b ]
.RB [ \-d ]
.I dn

.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page documents briefly the
.B univention_policy_result
command.
It is a tool to calculate and show the result of applying all policies to the object specified by the \fIdn\fP.

.SH OPTIONS
A summary of options is included below.
.TP
.BI \-h\  ldaphost
Specify an alternate host on which the LDAP server is running.
.TP
.BI \-D\  binddn
Use the Distinguished Name \fIbinddn\fP to bind to the LDAP directory.
.TP
.BI \-w\  passwd
Use \fIpasswd\fP as the password for simple authentication..
.TP
.BI \-y\  password-file
Read password for simplce authentication from \fIfile\fP.
.TP
.B \-s
Convert key/value pairs into shell compatible format, e.g. ';' and '\-' are replaced by '_' for keys.
.TP
.B \-b
Turn off verbose output, just print unescaped key/value pairs.
.TP
.B \-d
Turn on verbose debugging output.
.TP
.I dn
Distinguished Name of the entity, for which the result of applied policies should be determined.
.SH BUG
Univention Config Registry variable names are not hex-unencoded when using \fB\-s\fP.
.br
Multi valued fields are exported as multiple single valued fields with the same name when using \fB\-s\fP.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR univention\-admin (8),
.BR univention\-directory\-manager (8).
.br
This program is documented fully in the
.IR "Univention Corporate Server Manual" .

.SH AUTHOR
Copyright (c) 2001-2019 Univention GmbH, Germany
