.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.TH UCS-TEST 1 2012-03-21 UCS

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ucs-test
.RI [ options ]

.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page documents briefly the
.B ucs-test
comannd to run tests on UCS systems.

.SH OPTIONS
A summary of options is included below.
.TP
\fB\-h\fP, \fB\-\-help\fP
Show a help message and exit.

.SS Test selection
.TP
\fB\-s\fP \fISECTION\fP, \fB\-\-section=\fP\fISECTION\fP
Run tests only from the specified section.
.TP
\fB\-p\fP \fITAG\fP, \fB\-\-prohibit=\fP\fITAG\fP
Skip tests with this tag.
The option may be used multiple times to skip multiple tags.
.TP
\fB\-r\fP \fITAG\fP, \fB\-\-require=\fP\fITAG\fP
Only run tests with this tag.
The option may be used multiple times to require multiple tags.
.TP
\fB\-g\fP \fITAG\fP, \fB\-\-ignore=\fP\fITAG\fP
Ignore tag by not requiring nor prohibiting it.
The option may be used multiple times to ignore multiple tags.
.TP
\fB\-E\fP \fIEXPOSURE\fP, \fB\-\-exposure=\fP\fIEXPOSURE\fP
Run more dangerous tests.
Allowed values are \fBsafe\fP (default), \fBcareful\fP and \fBdangerous\fP.

.SS Output options
.TP
\fB\-n\fP, \fB\-\-dry\-run\fP
Only show which tests would run.
.TP
\fB\-f\fP, \fB\-\-filtered\fP
Hide tests with unmatched pre-conditions from the output instead of printing them as skipped.
.TP
\fB\-F\fP \fIFORMAT\fP, \fB\-\-format=\fP\fIFORMAT\fP
Select output format.
Available formats include \fBtext\fP (default), \fBtap\fP, \fBhtml\fP, \fBjenkins\fP.
.TP
\fB\-v\fP, \fB\-\-verbose\fP
Increase verbosity.
May be used multiple times.
.TP
\fB\-i\fP, \fB\-\-interactive\fP
Run test connected to terminal.
Otherwise the tests runs with the standard input connected to \fI/dev/null\fP and the output redirected to the \fIlogfile\fP.
.TP
\fB\-c\fP, \fB\-\-count\fP
Prefix tests by count.
.TP
\fB\-l\fP \fILOGFILE\fP, \fB\-\-logfile=\fP\fILOGFILE\fP
Path to log file.
Without this option a file like \fI/var/log/univention/test_XXX.log\fP is used where \fIXXX\fP is replaced by the unix epoche.

.SH EXAMPLE
.nf
ucs-test \-s updater \-e dangerous -vvv
.fi

.SH FILES
.TP
.I /usr/share/ucs-test/
Base directory for tests.
.TP
.I /var/log/univention/test_XXX.log
Logfile of test case output.

.SH AUTHOR
Copyright (c) 2012-2019 Univention GmbH, Germany
