.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.TH UNIVENTION-DIRECTORY-LISTENER 8 2012-03-16 UCS
.SH NAME
univention\-directory\-listener \- UCS LDAP directory listener

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B univention\-directory\-listener
.RI [ options ]

.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page documents briefly the
.B univention\-directory\-listener
command, which implements the listening part of the univention LDAP replication and update mechanism.
It polls updates from an
.BR univention\-directory\-notifier (8)
running on TCP port 6669 on the server specified through the "\fInotifier/server\fP" univention-config-registry variable.

.SH OPTIONS
A summary of options is included below.
.TP
.BI \-d\  level
Set debugging \fIlevel\fP: 0=Error, 1=Warning, 2=Process, 3=Info, 4=All.
.TP
.B \-F
Run in foreground (intended for process supervision).
.TP
.BI \-H\  ldap-uri
LDAP server URI.
.TP
.BI \-h\  host
LDAP server address.
.TP
.BI \-p\  port
LDAP server port.
.TP
.BI \-b\  base-dn
LDAP base dn.
.TP
.BI \-D\  bind-dn
LDAP bind dn.
.TP
.BI \-w\  password
LDAP bind password.
.TP
.BI \-y\  file
Read LDAP bind password from file.
.TP
.B \-x
LDAP simple bind.
.TP
.BR \-Z [ Z ]
LDAP start TLS request (\fB\-ZZ\fP to require successful response).
.TP
.BI \-Y\  meachanism
SASL mechanism.
.TP
.BI \-U\  username
SASL username.
.TP
.BI \-R\  realm
SASL realm.
.TP
.BI \-m\  listeners
Listener module path (may be specified multiple times).
.TP
.B \-B
Only use dc backup notifier.
.TP
.BI \-c\  cache_dir
Listener cache path, default is \fI/var/lib/univention\-directory\-listener\fP.
.TP
.BI \-l\  ldap_dir
LDAP state path, default is \fI/var/lib/univention\-ldap\fP.
.TP
.B \-g
Start from scratch (remove cache).
.TP
.B \-i
Remove old cache and only initialize handlers in foreground mode.
.TP
.B \-P
Keep old cache and only initialize handlers in foreground mode.
.TP
.BI \-o\  file
Write transaction \fIfile\fP.

.SH FILES
.TP
.I /var/log/univention/listener.log
Log file for the listener.
.TP
.I /var/lib/univention\-directory\-listener/cache.db
Cache of LDAP data.
.TP
.I /var/lib/univention\-directory\-listener/notifier_id
Number of the last processed transaction.
.TP
.I /var/lib/univention\-directory\-listener/handlers/
Directory containing the state of the Listener modules.
.TP
.I /var/lib/univention-ldap/schema/id/id
Schema epoch version.
.TP
.I /var/lib/univention-ldap/listener/listener
File containing pending transactions (id, dn, command) not yet handles by notifier.

.SH SIGNALS
.TP
.B SIGHUP
Forces the Listener to re-load all modules.
.TP
.B SIGUSR1
Increases the debugging level by one.
.TP
.B SIGUSR2
Decreases the debugging level by one.
.TP
.BR SIGPIPE ,\  SIGINT ,\  SIGQUIT ,\  SIGTERM ,\  SIGABRT
Terminates the Listener.


.SH UNIVENTION CONFIG REGISTRY VARIABLES
.TP
.B server/role
Used to determine the host on which
.BR univention\-directory\-notifier (8)
runs.
.TP
.B notifier/server
Preferred host name of the notifier server.
.TP
.B ldap/backup
Space separated list of LDAP server host names used by all roles expect domaincontroller_masters and backups.
.TP
.B ldap/master
Host name of the LDAP server for domaincontroller_masters, backups and all other roles.
.TP
.BR notifier/server/port
TCP port number of the notifier service. Default: \fB6669\fP.
.TP
.BR ldap/master/port ,\  ldap/backup/port
TCP port number of the LDAP servers on domaincontroller_masters and backups.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR univention\-directory\-notifier (8),
.BR slapd (8).
.br
This program is documented fully in the
.IR "Univention Corporate Server Manual" .

.SH AUTHOR
Copyright (c) 2001-2019 Univention GmbH, Germany
